---
layout: post
title: "Code Lab: The Spine Javascript Framework"
description: Introduction to how spine.js is used on the Periscope Data front-end
date: 2017-12-12
share: true
---

<style>
.example {
  background: #f1f0f0;
  line-height: 1.8rem;
  width: 90%;
  margin: 10px auto 18px;
}
</style>

## Introduction
Much of the Periscope Data front-end is built using Spine.js, which is a lightweight Javascript library that enables developers to build front-end applications using the Model-View-Controller (MVC) pattern. MVC is pretty much *the* design pattern of the web, so I won't go into too much detail about it here. In the context of Periscope, you can think of a greatly simplified view of the MVC pattern to look something like this: 

<div class="example">
<b>Model</b>: Customer sql queries and their data, specific chart settings
<br>
<b>View</b>: HTML templates containing the layout of front-end, "filled in" by data from the Model.
<br>
<b>Controller</b>: Control how the front-end changes in response to user interaction and updated data.
</div>

Much of our front-end code handles user interaction, so will in this code lab, we will be focusing on Spine controllers, and how they are used at Periscope.

## "Logisistics" Within the Periscope Repository
Periscope application code using Spine.js is located at:
```
clocktower/app/assets/javascripts/app
```

The source code for Spine.js is located at:
```
clocktower/app/assets/javascripts/lib
```

## Mental Model
Spine controllers are Javascript classes\*, which can be thought of as "wrappers" around a logical group of HTML elements. To get a sense of which Spine controller classes control groups of HTML elements, append the following line to ```clocktower/app/assets/javascripts/lib/spine.js.coffee``` after line 436:, and open your browser's developer tools. When you see the HTML elements associated with the web page, you will also see an attribute data-spine-controller, which will reveal which Spine controller is repsonsible for cotnroller that group of HTML elements.

```
437: @el.attr('data-spine-controller', @constructor.name)
```

