---
layout: simple
title: Just Enough HTML & CSS to Create a Simple Blog Template
date: 2017-11-18
share: true
---
#### TODO
What other words are there for "these technologies (when referencing HTML and CSS?").

Idea -> start with no styling (just plain HTML, so that is easier to see how different elements have styling associated with them). Introduce CSS styling as we get to the content that explains what it is. Then it becomes easier to see how the two key points of CSS differ from each other, and makes a smoother transition from point (2) to the rest of the document. It will also help make the introduction of CSS selectors by class a little easier.

<hr>


#### Audience: anyone who wants to learn more about HTML and CSS

Whoa, what is going on here? Your eyes aren't playing a trick on you - the page looks like this for a reason. If you are still reading this, you presumably want to learn more about HTML and CSS, and I want to teach HTML and CSS with a page that has none. We will use HTML and CSS to gradually build the site back up into something modern. At the end, we will have created a simple blog layout that hopefully will illustrate the fundamentals of HTML and CSS.

## What is HTML?

Let's first think about a typical blog post. A typical blog post will have distinct components: a title, headers, paragraphs of text, lists, tables, images, etc. As these components serve different purposes, they are displayed differently. Titles and headings are big and bold to make them stand out, items in lists are bulleted to imply some form of grouping. In other words, these components have _visual meanings_.

This leads us to HTML, which stands for Hypertext Markup Language. A markup language (from [Wikipedia](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Markup_language)) is a "system for annotating a document in a way that is syntactically distinguishable from the text". The parts of the document that are "syntatically distinguishable from the text" are known as <u>HTML tags</u>, and are important to browsers, as they **give the plain text visual meaning**. HTML tags bracket the plain text they annotate, like this:

```
<u> Underlined Text </u>
```

Note: &lt;u&gt; is the opening tag, and &lt;/u&gt; is the closing tag.

HTML tags, combined with the plain text they enclose, are known as <u>HTML elements</u>. Browsers have a pre-defined notion of how HTML tags should effect the plain text they enclose. For example, when it sees "Underlined Text" surrounded by the ```<u>``` HTML tag from above, it will render it like this:

<u>Underlined Text</u>

By using HTML tags to create HTML elements, I can tell the browser to:

<ul>
	<li id="ul">create a bulleted list, and have this be the first item</li>
	<li id="link"><a href="https://www.w3schools.com/tags/ref_byfunc.asp">link this item to a list of HTML tags and their meanings</a></li>
</ul>

<div class="note">
Note: Hover over each element in the list to see the HTML tags used to create the element
</div>

#### Recap: What Can We Do?

Using HTML tags, we can give various parts of our blog visual meaning.

## What is CSS?

CSS is a language that lets users customize the "style" of webpages. Style can be an ambigious term, so to set the proper context , we will begin by noting that the above paragraphs have no styling (which is why they look like they come from the 1990s). This is another way of saying they were rendered by the browser's default interpretation of what HTML tags look like. We can change those defaults through a series of rules called <u>CSS rules</u>.

Let's say I want to emphasize an important sentence by underlying it. Like we saw above, I would first give my sentence visual meaning by wrapping it in a ```<u>``` HTML tag. But that's not enough - I want to make my sentence stand out more by making it red. To do so, I need to write a CSS rule to tell the browser what exactly underlined text should look like.

<u style="color: red">This is an important sentence. Notice it.</u>

This short example illustrates the fundamental relationship between HTML and CSS.
**CSS rules apply to groups of HTML elements, and provide precise control over their visual representations.**

A CSS rule consists of [two parts](https://www.w3schools.com/css/css_syntax.asp), a <u>selector</u> and one or more <u>declarations</u>. Not coincidentally, these two parts map nicely to our fundamental relationship. Selectors are how we specify the group of HTML elements that will be styled. The declaration(s) are what precisely control the style, and apply to all the elements matched by the selector.

We now know enough about CSS to add styling to our blog post. We'll use the most basic of CSS selectors, which simply mirror HTML tags. After such a "tag-based" CSS rule is established, whenever browsers encounter HTML elements annotated with such a tag, they will render it according to the delcared style.

An example will help make this concept clear. Click on the CSS rule below to center the text on all section headings on this page.

<pre id="centerh2" style="cursor: pointer">
h2 { text-align: center; }
</pre>

<script type="text/javascript">
  $("pre#centerh2").on("click", function() {
    $('head').append("<style>h2 { text-align: center; } </style>");
  });
</script>

#### Recap: What Can We Do?

We can write a simple CSS rule, with "tag-based" CSS selectors, to style HTML elements.


<script type="text/javascript">
  var cssEnabled = false;

  $("button#clickMe").on("click", function() {
    if (cssEnabled) $('link[href="/assets/css/main.css"]').remove();
    else $('head').append('<link rel="stylesheet" href="/assets/css/main.css" type="text/css" />');

    cssEnabled = !cssEnabled;
    var textToDisplay = cssEnabled ? 'Remove CSS' : 'Add CSS'
    $(this).text(textToDisplay) // fuck you javascript.
  });
</script>


## The Div and the Class Attribute

<div class="addStyle">
While we're making progress, our current capabilites are a bit limited. We can target specific groups of HTML elements by their tags, but what if we want to style <em>arbitrary</em> sections of our blog - say, all the text from here until the end of the page?

<br><br>

The <code style="display: inline-block">&lt;div&gt;</code> tag exists for this very reason. Unlike the HTML tags we have encountered so far, like headings or links, a <code style="display: inline-block">&lt;div&gt;</code> has no visual meaning. Instead, <b>the <code style="display: inline-block">&lt;div&gt;</code> allows for generic grouping of HTML elements, all of which can then become the targets of CSS selectors and custom styling declarations</b>.

<br><br>

Because of its grouping capabilities, the <code style="display: inline-block">&lt;div&gt;</code> is the most commonly used HTML tag. A simple "div-tag" CSS selector would therefore match almost every single element on the page. And while we get more ways to define groups of HTML elements, we also lose precise control. We combat this loss of precise control by adding <u>attributes</u> to our HTML tags. The most important attribute is the class attribute, and a HTML element with a class attribute specified looks like this:

<pre>
&lt;div class="myClass"&gt;Text&lt;/div&gt;
</pre>

Class attributes let us refine our selector queries. A special CSS selector exists for selecting all HTML elements belonging to a particular class - it involves pre-pending a "." in front of the class name.
I've wrapped the rest of this post in a <code style="display: inline-block">&lt;div&gt;</code>, and I've given this <code style="display: inline-block">&lt;div&gt;</code> a class attribute called <code style="display: inline-block">addStyle</code>. Click on the CSS rule below to apply styling to the rest of this post from here on out - it will make the rest of the blog much more readable, I promise.

<pre id="addStyle" style="cursor: pointer">
.addStyle {
    width: 80%;
    margin: 0 auto;
    line-height: 1.6em;
    font-size: 20px;
    font-family: Georgia;
}
</pre>

<h2>Structure of HTML</h2>

Now that we know the &lt;div&gt; allows us to group HTML elements together for styling, we will precisely define how these groupings are achieved.

<br><br>

The HTML elements that make up this page are arranged in a tree. At the root of this tree is the <code style="display: inline-block">&lt;body&gt;</code> element - all other elements are children of this element. Any HTML element can be either the child or parent of other HTML elements. To create a parent-child relationship between elements, we "nest" the child between the opening and closing tags of its parent, like this:

<pre>
&lt;div&gt;
  &lt;h1&gt; I am h1, the child of div. &lt;/h1&gt;
&lt;/div&gt;
</pre>

The parent-children relationship between elements is very important. I purposely withheld the full name of CSS until this relationship was established. CSS stands for Cascading Style Sheets; cascading references the fact that the styling declared by CSS rules apply not only to the elements matched by its selector, but to all of its children elements as well.

<br><br>

In a sense, writing basic HTML and CSS boils down to:

<ul>
  <li>identifying sections of content that should common custom styling</li>
  <li>grouping them together with &lt;div&gt; elements</li>
  <li>placing them at the correct level in relation to other elements</li>
  <li>writing CSS rules with the appropriate selectors and declarations</li>
</ul>

With that, we have a complete picture of how HTML and CSS work together. We can use that knowledge to construct a simple layout for this blog.

</div>

All of their children is here is key, as it forms the backbone of the strategy we will use to create our simple layout, when we talk about the separation between _content_ and _container_ &lt;div&gt;.

### Putting These Concepts Together: A Simple Layout

To create a simple layout, we can take advantage of the fact that all children HTML elements automatically inherit the CSS rules defined by their parents.

We will begin by examining the CSS rules that control how the text is centered on the screen, and how much space is between the text and the edges of the browser (the margins).

You'll notice that the width of the text is a constant, no text anywhere on the screen exceeds a certain width. This is a good indication that there is some styling being applied to a "container" div, which is a parent of all the elements that contain content on the page. In this case, the top level "div", which is given a class named "content-container" controls the over-arching style that we see on the page.

```
.content-container {
    max-width: 58rem;
    padding: 5rem 1rem;
    margin-left: auto;
    margin-right: auto;
}
```
[EDIT] -> introduce the body element?

Max-width: The max-width of any content will not exceed 58rem (a standard unit based on font-size, used so that that measurements can be made relative to some pre-defined value for a better sense of scale).
Setting margin-left and margin-right to be "auto" is a very common techinque, this will center the content in the middle of the page. Any space between the parent's width (in this case, the &lt;body&gt; element, which assumes the width of the browser window) and this element's width (in this case, which is max-width: 58rem) will be split equally between the right and left margins, creating the centered effect.

All other content inherits the style set by this content-container div, which means that no other content on the page will exceed a width of 58rem, and that content will also be centered on the page.

With this parent content-container anchored in place, we can control the width of any content we want by setting it to be an explicit percentage of the parent's width. For example,

<div style="text-align: center; width: 75%; margin: 0px auto;"><p>
  I want to make sure that the text that this text is limited to 75% width of the parent. Any content that exceeds that width should spill over to the next line, and that text should be centered on the page.
</p></div>

The 75% works in this case because in essence we have defined a "global" width, that we can always reference to.

<div style="width: 120%; margin: 0px auto;">
<p>I can also make sure that text spans larger than the max-width of the screen, by explicitly setting a width that is greater than the parent's width. The text here will be the longest line on the screen.</p>
</div>


### Recap
This is a basic example, but it is enough to illustrate the fundamentals of HTML and CSS. To recap:

1. HTML is a way to provide visual meaning to plain text. This meaning is supplied through HTML tags, which are interpreted in a certain way by the browser. Plaintext, combined with tags, are called HTML elements.
-> List of HTML tags

2. CSS rules apply to groups of HTML elements. Since there are only a limited number of HTML tags, the &lt;div&gt; element is used as a generic way to group elements. They are referenced by CSS rules through their attributes, the most common attribute being the class. CSS rules apply, by default all the children elements matched by the supplied selector (more precise selectors are used to override this behavior)
-> CSS attributes, CSS selectors, CSS order precedence

4. One easy way to take advantage of this hierachy is by setting generic style attributes in "container" &lt;div&gt; and letting these style attributes percolate down to their children.
-> CSS layouts?

<script type="text/javascript">
  $("pre#addStyle").on("click", function() {
    $('head').append("<style> .addStyle { width: 80%; margin: 0 auto; line-height: 1.6em; font-size: 20px; font-family: Georgia;  } </style>");
  });

  $(document).ready(function() {
    $('pre#addStyle').click();
    // $('pre#centerh2').click();
  });

</script>
